[Music]
This is business breakdowns.
Business breakdowns is a series of
conversations with investors and
operators diving deep into a single
business. For each business, we explore
its history, its business model, its
competitive advantages, and what makes
it tick.
We believe every business has lessons
and secrets that investors and operators
can learn from and we are here to bring
them to you. To find more episodes of
breakdowns, check out join colossus.com.
All opinions expressed by hosts and
podcast guests are solely their own
opinions. Hosts, podcast guests, their
employers or affiliates may maintain
positions in the securities discussed in
this podcast. This podcast is
forformational purposes only and should
not be relied upon as a basis for
investment decisions.
This is Matt Russell and today we are
breaking down the Chicago Merkantile
Exchange. My guest is Adam Chandler,
co-pm at Claremont Global and we get
into the nitty-gritty of exchanges. I
find financial exchanges and clearing
houses fascinating. They're like stage
hands of capitalism where you really
don't see them in the spotlight, but
without them, the show would stop. And
even though we know how critical they
are to the system, I don't really think
we stopped to understand how they
operate, how they make the impressive
money that they do and quietly shape the
flow of money. As you could tell, I'm
pretty interested and intrigued by the
top of exchanges and clearing houses.
And you will hear me pepper Adam with
questions about all things around this
business and its history. So, please
enjoy this breakdown of the Chicago
Merkantile Exchange.
All right, Adam, excited to have you
here to talk Chicago Merkantile
Exchange. And I actually thought the
best place to start might be stepping
back and giving us a reminder or a
lesson on the exchange business because
it's something that I think anybody
that's a market participant, they
understand it because they've lived with
it their entire careers, but maybe they
don't stop to think about why exchanges
exist, what role they play. So can you
give us just a brief overview of the
exchange business and anything that you
would highlight in terms of the details
that revolve around the exchange
business?
>> Hi Matt, thanks for having me on. I'll
start at a high level and and then we
can dig down. Essentially exchanges
serve two key functions. They bring
together buyers and sellers and then
they ensure the transaction is completed
and everyone gets what was agreed. So
maybe to draw a parallel, just imagine
trying to sell your house without a real
estate broker or an online platform,
just standing in your driveway and
yelling house for sale, hoping someone
who walks by wants exactly what you're
offering, and that person will be
willing to pay an acceptable price and
will be good for the money. It's a low
probability, and that's what trading
securities would be like without ad
exchanges. They effectively act as a
trusted platform where buyers and
sellers can instantly connect, but they
do more than just match people. They
create a deep pool of liquidity. And we
probably talk about liquidity a little
bit today. What we're really talking
about is just how easily and quickly you
can trade without causing big price
swings. And exchanges are designed to
concentrate that liquidity, bring
everyone together in one place, and just
make the trading smoother and more
efficient. And then the second part is
really making sure the transaction gets
completed. So when we sit in front of a
screen, we tend to think that the trade
is done once we hit buy or sell. But
behind the scenes, the exchange actually
works with a clearing house to finalize
the transaction. So this ensures the
money moves to the seller and the shares
or securities move to the buyer. So it's
a little bit like the escrow process in
real estate. It protects both sides and
ensures that the deal actually closes.
One of the biggest risks in trading is
that the other party might not follow
through. But we never really think about
that when we're trading and that's
because of the clearing houses which are
coordinated by the exchanges just
eliminate that risk. They guarantee the
trade will settle even if one party
defaults. So it's a bit like having a
referee in a safety net all rolled into
one making sure everyone plays fair and
no one gets left hanging.
>> Let's bring Chicago Merkantile Exchange
the topic of conversation in here. How
do they fit into the overall exchange
industry? Give us a little bit of sense
of who they are, what CME does, what
they specialize in. I think you're right
in that when most people think of an
exchange, they may not immediately think
of the CME. Perhaps they picture the New
York Stock Exchange with the ringing
bells and the stock tickers and equity
trading, but there's a whole other world
of financial markets which don't trade
stocks at all. So instead of stocks, CME
specializes in futures contracts. So
they're just standardized agreements to
buy or sell an asset at a set price on a
future date. And these contracts are
essential for hedging risk or
speculating on everything from interest
rate to oil. CME Group is the leading
marketplace for derivatives globally.
And what really sets the company apart
is the breadth and depth of its
offerings. So, it's the go-to exchange
for global benchmark products. Whether
you're trading US Treasury futures, S&P
500 e- minis, West Texas Intermediate
crude, or even commodities like cocoa.
If it's a key asset class, CME likely
has the most liquid futures for it. But
it doesn't just offer a wide range of
products. It also offers very deep
liquidity pools and that means tighter
spreads and faster execution and more
efficient pricing and for institutional
investors and sophisticated traders
that's a key distinction for CME. So
maybe just to help put markets in
context if we think about the US
Treasury futures market that's actually
now larger than the actual Treasury bond
market by one measure. So if we think
about the Treasury futures, they trade
about 800 billion in notional value a
day on average. So that's about 10% more
than the entire cash treasuries market.
And just highlights how liquid these
contracts are and one of the key
distinctions for CME. When I think of
Chicago, I do think of the commodities
which you just mentioned. So it might
have grown out of that where commodities
tend to have a very large futures market
and you see a lot of hedging from the
businesses going around there. But is
there anything else that played into
them becoming the market leader
particularly if I compare it to some of
the other exchanges which you mentioned
previously which from an equity
perspective the New York Stock Exchange
perhaps could have had this large
futures market. What would you say were
the events or things that played out
which gave them this market advantage
that they have today?
>> Its history goes back well over a
century now. And the story of CME really
begins during the 19th century in the
center of America. Back then farmers
faced a volatile mix of unpredictable
harvests. There was poor storage.
Markets were broadly disorganized and
agricultural prices swung wildly. Then
by the mid 1800s, Chicago was
transforming and there was the new canal
and there was rail infrastructure and it
became a central hub connecting the
Great Lakes to the Mississippi. And so
that really laid the foundation for some
centralized commodity markets in
particular grain. And in 1948 the
Chicago Board of Trade was established.
So, as a central grain exchange, it
allowed farmers and grain producers to
sell their crops at set prices
throughout the months between harvests
and just offered consumers more
transparent prices throughout the year.
While it started with forward contracts,
which are private agreements between
buyers and sellers, a little bit down
the track, it introduced standardized
futures contracts. So these were
centrally cleared and backed by margin
payments which dramatically reduced the
risk of default. So this innovation
brought structure and trust and
predictability to the agricultural
market. So that was really the
underpinning. Now much further down the
track, Chicago Board of Trade actually
becomes part of the CME group. On the
CME side, the Chicago Produce Exchange
was established in 1874.
And that was created to trade
perishables like butter and eggs. And by
just before the turn of 1900s, it had
evolved into the Chicago butter and egg
board, which doesn't exactly sound like
a financial powerhouse, but it laid the
foundation for the CME. And then after
World War I, the butter and egg board
restructured into the Chicago Merkantile
Exchange.
>> Interesting to get some of those very
tangible origins and how they were being
used in terms of consumers and
consumables.
When you think about the evolution of
exchanges, again, I can go back to
thinking about a Chicago trading floor
and that representing an exchange and
needing to have a license today. I know
a lot of this is more softwaredriven,
more digitally driven. Is it all
essentially a software platform today?
How would you describe the transaction
elements and how they're taking place
today
>> in terms of the business? There's a lot
of focus on the matching engine and the
software is essential, but it's not just
a software platform. I think that would
underplay the importance of day-to-day
operations and client relationships,
product innovation, risk management, and
just the judgment that's required of
that management team. You want to ensure
the smooth functioning of the system and
in particular counterparties paying is a
key component and markets are obviously
dynamic and can move to extremes and so
CME's clearing and risk management are
designed to minimize the possibility
that a clearing member will default on
its obligations.
So in the event of a member not quickly
discharging its obligations, there's a
transparent hierarchy of capital to fund
the losses beginning with the defaulting
member's capital. And we've seen at
other clearing houses that this is not
just a theoretical consideration, but I
might be going a little bit too far into
the detail here. I mean, we can talk
about some of the benefits that are
brought by clearing and maybe dig a
little bit into how that works as well.
>> Yeah, absolutely. I mean any tangible
examples of what these things would look
like would be useful whether it is the
idea of risk management in terms of
evaluating the counterparties and
whether that happens with a committee in
hand or whether there's a specific model
that's used to do that but also examples
in terms of what the clearing house
represents. Just some tangible things
that can bring it to life. how clearing
occurs. For those who are less familiar,
a clearing house is an intermediary
between buyers and sellers. So, as the
intermediary or counterparty to every
trade, the clearing house acts as the
buyer for every seller and the seller
for every buyer for each trade. So, to
be clear, and this is important, they do
not take proprietary risk. They're
acting as a counterparty for each trade
to help mitigate the counterparty risk.
So you don't have to worry about the
other end of your trade falling through.
So in equities and equity options,
there's a common clearing agency and
that allows fungeibility of securities.
And so this facilitates multiple venues
for trading. If you were to buy
Microsoft shares, say on NASDAQ this
morning and you sell them this afternoon
on a dark pool, you're able to do that
in equities. And many traders probably
aren't even aware which venue they are
buying and selling shares on. It's
different when we get to futures
contracts. At CME, there's a vertically
integrated structure. So, trading and
clearing is bundled. CME only clear what
they trade. And it actually goes further
than a commercial arrangement. It's
getting into the weeds a little bit, but
probably quite important to understand.
Under section 403 of the DoddFrank Act,
there's actually a part which says, and
I'll quote this, in order to minimize
systemic risk, under no circumstances
shall a derivatives clearing
organization be compelled to accept the
counterparty risk of another clearing
organization. So what does that mean? It
just means the vertically integrated
structure is justified by the systemic
risk that futures fungeability could
pose from poorly collateralized
contracts. So just keep in mind that
futures given their inherent leverage
require collateral when you're
initiating a position and are subject to
marktomarket calculations. So the idea
there is that you want to remove the
debts by settling profits and losses
rather than allowing outstanding
obligations to accumulate in the system.
So futures are marked to mark intraday
and it's obviously very important that
the margining is adequate because that
protects everyone from a clearing
perspective and make sure that the
counterparty you're dealing with is
money good. So what's different to
equities is that in equities with margin
we might have two times leverage and
under the system now we have settlement
of equities on a T+1 basis so just for a
day that's very different in futures
where you have contracts which span
months and leverage may be 50 times so
there are very sound reasons for central
clearing and it's a key part of CME's
competitive advantage because what it's
doing is locking that liquidity into CME
exchanges or CME products. So on one
hand we've got the liquidity which makes
it a sort of low cost high value want to
go where the liquidity is. It's a real
network business and on the other hand
we've got this lock in in terms of the
nonfgeibility and centralized clearing
for their products. I think this ties
into another point that you mentioned
just in terms of understanding the
counterparty risk. While CME is not
proprietary trading in any way, it's not
owned on their book. There could be
counterparty risk to the extent that one
side of the transaction is unable to
meet its commitments. So how much of
this risk management function how does
that play a role in the exchanges and
CME in particular because you did
mention the inherent leverage that
exists with these products is extreme.
So was that just part of their DNA? Can
you just talk a little bit more about
that because it's emerging as a very
interesting point within this business?
>> They clearly have systems which they're
using for their margining, but it's one
of the more technical aspects of an
exchange that perhaps users are sort of
blissfully unaware of. But it's a real
risk. I mean, not at CME, but on the
NASDAQ AB exchange in 2018. good example
of how important this risk management
is. There was an individual trader that
bet heavily that the price spread
between Nordic and German electricity
would narrow and it actually blew out.
It went the opposite way. The spread
widened sharply due to unexpected market
movements and it caused huge mark to
mark losses on his position. The trader
couldn't actually meet the margin calls
required by NASDAQ clearing and his
positions were forcibly liquidated, but
the losses exceeded his posted
collateral, which triggered a default.
So NASDAQ clearing had to step in and
tap its default fund for over 100
million euro. So that's a pool of
capital contributed by all the clearing
members and that was to help cover the
shortfall. Another example which has
happened more recently was in 2022 when
we saw the London Metal Exchange botch
its risk management and there was a
short squeeze margin calls couldn't be
met and the price of nickel surged and
the LME was cancelled billions of
dollars of trade which caused
significant losses for some market
participants and then that was fought
out in the courts. So these are all
incidents of of sort of the reminder of
systemic risk if the systems and people
managing margins and collateral aren't
up to it. So beyond it, you know, the
operational execution and the risk
management are essential and CMA right
up there as bestin-class. I'll admit I'm
a tourist to the exchanges, so I might
not have appreciated it nearly as much
going into this conversation, but it's
notable to me that you often hear about
the regulations around banks and that
same risk. Why do you think the
exchanges don't get nearly as much press
when it sounds like that's just as much
of a concern or something that needs to
be considered? Is it simply a lack of
tie to consumers? somewhat surprised
that I haven't come across as much
materials on the risk that can be an
inherit in exchanges.
>> I think it depends on the type of
exchange you're looking at and obviously
futures exchanges are a little different
to the most commonly known or thought of
exchanges, stock exchanges. So that
would be maybe part of the reason. The
other part comes back to what we were
talking about before with exchanges not
taking proprietary risk. So if we think
about what happened as we went through
the financial crisis and it's been so
well profiled but the big short is as
good an example as any where you have
OTC contracts and you have individuals
who were trading with banks but the
banks are taking proprietary risk so
they might be the other side of that
trade and they're holding that trade and
then they're also marking the positions
that creates an inherent conflict with
the exchanges. that's different. The
exchange is not taking proprietary risk.
They're not allowed to. And so what
they're trying to do each day is monitor
for that risk. And I think the other
reason why you don't hear as much about
this is because it's very rare that it
is a problem. It's typically well
handled. And the reason is you have this
clearing house sitting in the back where
they're demanding more margin. So as we
move into an environment where things
become more volatile, there's greater
uncertainty, they're demanding more
collateral be posted to protect the
underlying buyer and then obviously they
have this capital hierarchy. So if
someone can't meet particular capital
call, then there's a backs stop there
with that fund for default. Yeah, as you
spoke it out, it makes sense in terms of
the difference there, particularly with
a proprietary book and how you're
marking assets rather than just thinking
about the margin of the counterparty. We
could transition back to CME and just a
little bit about how they win. If I take
what you've said thus far, I can think
about them winning just purely by
getting more volumes traded on the
exchange. Is that a fair
characterization? How do you think about
the growth lever of this business? Is it
tied to volume specifically? What else
goes into it?
>> It is tied to volume. I mean maybe just
before touching on that might be worth
thinking about how the exchanges have
developed and we did talk about their
foundations with commodities going back
to the 1800s where they were a market
for farmers and producers and consumers
and that has clearly been central to the
growth. But it also taught CME something
which was crucial which was how to build
markets that manage uncertainty. And
that same principle hedging against
volatility was applied to entirely new
asset classes. By the 1970s CME had
begun to reinvent itself and it
introduced the world's first currency
futures which was quite a radical idea
at the time. No one had ever created a
futures market for foreign exchange and
the timing was around the collapse of
Breton Woods. Currencies were suddenly
floating and they were volatile and the
CME chairman at the time saw an
opportunity and he proposed currency
futures but the idea needed some
credibility. Interestingly enough, he
turned to Milton Freriedman. Go off on a
little tangent here but he was obviously
the Nobel Prizewinning economist who's
very well known and documented. He
actually wrote a feasibility study
supporting the idea and he charged about
$75,000 for that which certainly paid
off. It opened the door to a whole new
world of financial derivatives. Melamade
who is the chairman at the time called
it the best investment CME ever made and
even today he's probably right.
Financial futures generate billions in
revenue at CME each year. So they
continue to evolve but in terms of
volume it is in some ways very much a
volume game. So volume grows from areas
including new clients and the key push
there is to non US clients which are
currently just over 30% of volume but
then also retail and we're talking about
more sophisticated retail at least we
have been historically high net worth
individuals for example they also grow
by cross-selling to existing clients and
then through new products and markets
and that example of the move into
financial futures is at the more extreme
end for CME. I mean new asset classes
are less common. More recently they've
added crypto more of the innovation
tends to happen around the edges and
then there's often extensions of
existing asset classes like the
introduction of the microcontracts
which a standard contract and then
reduce the size of it to make it more
accessible and have tighter hedging. So
overall we do see some innovation but
really it's volume growth from as
markets grow as the number of clients
grow and the push into international and
then using different products I guess a
greater share of wallet from the
existing clients
>> in those early days take something like
currency futures was the original idea
that these would be used by corporations
as hedging instruments I know
speculation tends to take over for a lot
of the derivative markets but just in
their origins in the beginnings was
there a tie to industry corporations
kind of a more tangible use case for the
contracts
>> in some ways this hasn't changed in that
core liquidity wants real money rather
than speculation the speculation follows
the real money and that's maybe part of
the lesson
from starting in those commodity markets
where you had the producers sitting
there and wanting to hedge and then the
speculation comes in on top of that. And
we can talk about this more as we think
about competition. But having that real
money underpin the contracts is core to
what CME is offering and to the
liquidity and the real money that
underpins the system. When I think about
the landscape of exchanges, it sounds
like they have carved out a dominant
niche of the market, which is actually
to call it a niche is probably
understating it. But thinking about why
there are multiple players, why there's
not just one exchange, can you just talk
a little bit about that and their
ability to just bring more liquidity,
capital trading on their exchange versus
others? They do compete with a number of
exchanges, but they tend not to compete
directly for the same benchmark
products. Part of that is there is a
natural monopoly around these
businesses. It is a true network
business. So if we think back to that
definition of market liquidity, the
ability for a market to absorb execution
of a large purchase or sales quickly
without a large price impact. It means
that like any network business, the more
people that use a service or product,
the more valuable it becomes. And so you
can see that with CME, I mean the
standout product for them is on the
interest rate futures side where CME has
a circuit 90% plus share in US interest
rate futures. But the product that they
offer has a really high cost to value as
a result of that. So on an average
interest rate contract, the fees are
small. We think about interest rates on
average revenue per contract is
approximately50
against an $8 tick size. So they're only
taking a small amount of that ultimate
benefit that they're bringing to a
consumer. If they increase their rate
per contract a small amount, it's not
going to have any impact on what value
they're bringing to the end user or
trader there because of that spread size
versus the actual cost. If you're trying
to execute in large size, the key thing
that you're focused on is can I execute
at a tight bid ask spread and not move
the market too far. So, while we've
spoken about clearing houses and another
reason is collateral, to be clear, the
most important reason why contracts
trade on the CME versus elsewhere is the
depth of the markets that they have.
>> I guess on that point on the pricing or
what they generate per contract, how
much does that move over time? Is it
something that there's a trend line
around? You mentioned they're not taking
a large percentage of the overall value
provided. Can you talk a bit about their
pricing, how it's set, how much it's
changed? Pricing is an interesting one.
When I first started looking at CME, I
was probably a little more diligent in
trying to track it on a product
byproduct basis and eventually threw my
hands in the air. It is hard to track.
There are a number of factors that
influence price. The key ones are really
the composition of members versus
non-members. So generally member
customers are charged lower fees than
non-member customers. Secondly, product
mix. There is variation in the rate per
contract at a high level. Metals they
have the highest RPC interest rates the
lowest. Then also the grid structure
that they have. So there are pricing
grids and higher volumes are rewarded
with lower rates. So there's quite a
number of different factors that impact
what the ultimate RPC is per contract.
And then in recent years it's become a
little bit more complicated because CME
has introduced micro products which are
just smaller sized contracts. So they're
on average about onetenth the notional
size of their standard counterparts and
they have a lower RPC. But when we
adjust for size there's actually a 30 to
40% pricing premium. So smaller
contracts I guess more accessible
tighter hedging but more expensive. So
when you put all that together it does
become quite hard to track on a granular
basis. But what we do see it's quite
apparent is that as volumes go up we see
the RPC come down within the different
asset classes and once again that
provides a little bit of stability for
the business overall in a lighter volume
environment you are getting higher price
and and vice versa. So from time to time
CME do take price but they tend to do it
very judiciously and as I said it's hard
to track there are a lot of factors
there. Yeah, it certainly sounds like
it. Is the metals being higher priced
versus interest rates being lower
priced? Does that just go back to the
size of those markets, how much
liquidity exists, and that somewhat
correlates into the pricing that's
charged? I think we're probably at a
point where it's more related to the
legacy and where they have been rather
than being tightly correlated to
specific factors on a monthly basis or
whatever it may be.
>> Fair. You talked a little bit about the
different products. Can you give us a
snapshot of revenue byproduct? Anything
that you would use to describe where
they're generating the most dollars,
whether that's a revenue number, a
profit number, whatever it might be,
some breakdown of the business and what
constitutes the largest percentage of
it.
>> Sure. So, if we start at the revenue
line last year, CME did just over 6
billion of annual revenue. And then in
terms of the reported revenue
contribution about 80% is from clearing
and trading revenue and then 10% is
market data thereabouts. I'm using round
numbers and then other a large part of
that is a float on the non-cash
collateral. So keep in mind that people
have to post collateral when they're
trading on the CME and so there is a
float element to this business. The
non-cash collateral comes in at the
revenue line and then the cash
collateral comes in below the operating
line which is slightly confusing or
maybe not as expected when you first
look at the business within that trading
and clearing 80% of revenue. The largest
asset classes are interest rates firstly
that's about a third of trading and
clearing revenue and then equities are a
little under a quarter and then below
that we get to energy which is in the
mid to high teens. So the majority of
the money is made from the clearing and
the trading. Market data is often
referred to in exchanges as being the
exhaust of the business and that's
another way for things to be monetized.
Alternatively, providing that market
data might be an entree into developing
a client relationship. And typically
what the exchanges talk to is as they
see market data sales go up, that's a
good leading indicator for what's going
to happen to open interest and trading
volumes going forward as people do their
back tests and then move forward. When
it comes to either of those buckets,
whether it's the clearing house and
trading representing 80% or the product
breakdown of interest rates and equities
making up the largest percentage, have
either of those categories seen material
shifts over time or are you expecting
there to be material shifts where
there's really one growth engine that
will make up a larger percentage of the
business moving forward? Yes, look, I
call out interest rates. Firstly,
through the years following the
financial crisis, interest rates were
held down by quantitative easing and
there was low volatility. It was a hard
time for the CME on the interest rate
side of their business. And then that in
some ways compounds with as we touched
on the collateral and just the float
that they earn is is lower and there's
less trading and interest rates are
lower. Also that's really changed and
from our perspective as we went through
co and 2020 there was a lot of talk of
rates being low forever and we could
make the valuation stack up for the CME
if we were in a more anemic rates
environment in terms of the volatility
and the trading there but there was that
optionality to the upside at some point
we expected there'd be interest rates
again so where we are today is that the
US has approximately 49 billion or
thereabouts of treasury securities
outstanding and a deficit at just over
6% of GDP growing at just under $2
trillion peranom. So the underlying
asset class is growing and we're seeing
obviously big moves in rate. The yield
curve has certainly moved. We've seen
curves steepening. 20-year part of the
curve is now at or close enough to 5%.
And CME is a real beneficiary of that
rates volatility. So we've seen that
through 22 as we went through that
tightening cycle volumes really jumped
up and so they were a big beneficiary um
there but compared to where we were a
decade ago it was a very different story
and obviously that changes the
composition of the earnings particularly
that clearing and trading revenue the
other area which I'd call out where
there has been some structural change is
in energy where we're seeing US energy
production
increase with Henry Hub and WTI ramping
and the US is now the largest producer
of LNG and the swing producer of oil and
we're seeing more international
benchmarking to US products to West
Texas and Henry Hub. So the important
point is really it's an increasingly
risky and volatile world and CE volumes
are actually a beneficiary as a result
of that volatility and as things wax and
wayne we do see different asset classes
have greater or less contribution that's
important obviously from the diversity
of the earnings which CME has that
provides them a buffer as as we move
through different environments and a
more balanced or stable revenue new
growth profile tends to grow sort of in
that 5 to 8% range on the top line over
time when we think about it on on
organic basis with a little bit of
pricing but volume as we discussed is
really the key driver. The other benefit
of having those multiple asset classes
relates back to the collateral that the
client has to post. And so with more
products as well as just having ease of
you know having a consolidated platform
when you have to post collateral when
you've got a broader set of instruments
there may be offsets.
So we might think about you know long
2-year position which could be offset by
a short 5-year position and as a result
of that the exchange will require less
collateral than if the two positions
were held separately and as we all know
capital's obviously a valuable resource
and we want to optimize there. So those
six major asset classes do provide a
number of different benefits both to the
underlying users and traders as well as
the business itself. Should I think of
volatility or the notional amount
outstanding? If we're just to use the
interest rate example in US treasuries,
what would be a bigger driver of
volumes? The amount of treasuries
outstanding and the continued issuance
or volatility in the interest rate
markets. I think it really depends on
what time frame we're looking at. Over a
shorter time frame, volatility will be
more important, but over a longer time
frame, you can see that correlation
between the growth in the treasury
market and the trading volumes on CME.
So, one of the benefits of the deficit
is that you are going to see the stock
increase. And as we touched on before
with that 8 billion notional trading,
that's ahead of what the underlying
trading in the cash market is. And so
that just continues to feed further
growth in that particular asset class.
But you do raise a really good point,
Matt, in terms of the difference between
the notional and also the benefit from
inflation as well in some of their
product sets. As the amounts get bigger
and the number of contracts needed to
hedge grow or speculate grow, they're a
beneficiary of that.
>> Yeah, it's an interesting multiplier
effect. And I know notional outstanding
and volatility probably have a
relationship in and of themselves. So to
separate the two is a tricky endeavor,
but that's useful framing I think. And
you mentioned the diversity of the
business just in terms of having these
multiple whether you call it sector
asset class exposures. How does that
compare to some of the other exchanges
out there? Is it considered kind of a
more diverse and less of a pure play?
Does it look similar to other exchanges?
I'm just curious.
>> We'd really have to take it on a
casebyase basis and think about some of
their competitors including
Intercontinental Exchange, SIBO, Murray
Next, and Deutsche Boss.
Intercontinental Exchange is their most
direct competitor, but the product sets
don't actually have a lot of direct
overlap. Now in oil, CME has the US
focused WTI contracts while
intercontinental exchange or ICE has the
European focused Brent contract. So
maybe they are substitutable to a
certain extent. Isa's origin is in the
power markets and that's where they have
historically been strongest but they are
a very acquisitive company and they're
doing a lot of different things in the
mortgage market now which is a direction
which we haven't seen CME go at this
stage. SIBO on the other hand is an
equity and options exchange and due to
some history SIBO have equity index
options on S&P while CME have the
futures and options on the S&P. So there
is once again slightly different product
sets but more broadly there is some
overlap. Typically as a risk manager if
someone wants to trade an option they'll
use an option. and they'll be very
specific about the instrument they're
using. If they want to use a future,
then they'll be likely going to CME. And
then the other one is the London Stock
Exchange and through one of their
subsidiaries, they have a big share in
swaps clearing. broadly some of the
other derivatives exchanges which
there's clearly similarities differing
amounts of diversification
and I would classify CME as being more
of a pure play in the derivative space
but within that space it is well
diversified. The other one which is
probably worth calling out is Howard
Lutnik has created a rival exchange FMX
for US interest rate futures and that's
backed by some large banks and trading
firms who have equity in the venture and
then also the London stock exchanges
involved with that swap side of the
business. So once again as we're talking
before you need the real money and
exchanges don't just want to have prop
firms sitting there churning contracts.
They want real money accounts and with
FMX both Citadel and Jumper involved
they probably don't want to be on the
other side of each other for every
single trade either. So it's an
interesting dynamic on FMX. You know as
a side note it's interesting that we
spoke about liquidity before but in
times of stress that's when the need for
liquidity is greatest when traders want
it and they want to be on the dominant
exchange. So there was a little bit of
irony around Howard Lutnik representing
the US president with a tariff board on
that windy day back in April when the
tariffs were announced because it
created a lot of volatility and it
generated incredible volumes for CME but
at the same time it disincentivized the
use of some of the smaller exchanges
which had similar products but less
liquidity. So it's still early days for
FMX in the key product where they
compete in the sofa contract. So that's
the short-term interest rate contracts.
Their market share at the moment is
pretty thin circa 10 basis points and
we've seen them have days where there's
just no contracts trading and over the
years there's been a lot of challenges
to futures exchanges and I'm sure we'll
touch on the profitability and the
financial characteristics but it's
clearly an attractive space to be in.
From memory CME have seen off about
eight challenges to date. So there's
been plenty of attempts including by
some of the same characters that are
backing FMX but it just highlights how
hard it is to get traction given some of
those barriers to entry that we spoke
about the liquidity and the vertical
integration of trading and clearing.
>> It's very interesting when it comes to
the launch and particularly the banks
backing and having equity in this
business. Was there a catalyst that
drove that when it came to competition
or frustration with pricing or anything
along those lines? I'm just curious.
There's always going to be people who
see profit pools and then decide to
start something new and go after those
profit pools, but was there more to that
story that triggered that push?
>> Oh, we could speculate as to what the
key drivers are. I think more broadly
what you've seen with the banks is that
following the financial crisis there has
been an element of disintermediation and
we've seen that with OTC contracts and
the capital that's required to be held
against those and so having a contract
on exchange is more efficient than
having it as an OTC generally speaking
and so there've been really incentives
to move to exchanges but that obviously
has implications for the banks and their
profit pools as well. And I guess the
other reason is that CME is such a big
player and just that balance of power
and perhaps it's a way to try and
address that.
>> You touched on profitability. Let's get
towards that whether it's a margin
profile or however else you would want
to frame uh the profitability of the
business. How does CME stack up
themselves? And we'd be curious, you
know, in terms of comparing to some of
the competition whether there's a rule
of thumb for exchanges. But start with
CME and what the margin and earnings
profile looks like for the business.
Maybe if we start with the costs in the
business and then we can work from
there. As a percentage of the cost act,
compensation is about 40%. That's
without a doubt the biggest cost. And
then licensing fees are the second
biggest expense. So that's a mid to high
teens percentage of costs. And then
we've got tech and that's about low
teens percentage of the cost stack. And
after that it's amotization and
depreciation. Management are very
costconscious. They've been excellent
expense managers. It's been consistently
tight. So some of the dynamics we spoke
about before about pricing and how they
use that judiciously also obviously flow
into this. For most businesses when you
think about price it tends to be a big
margin driver. CME is a little bit
different. I mean while that's true
price may not be the biggest margin
driver each year and that's because
there's no need for another factory run
of widgets when they're doing
incremental volume. So the incremental
margins on new volumes are very high. So
circa 90%. So as we think about that
cost base and then the high incremental
margins what you have is a fixed cost
base and then low variable costs which
leads to a highly profitable business.
So to put that into context adjusted
operating margins are currently over
70%. on a gap basis, operating margins
are almost 70%. Um, and it's probably
also worth calling out that there's
float on cash collateral, which we
touched on before, below the operating
line, and also their JV with S&P, that's
below the operating income line. So,
when we look at before tax, it's
actually even higher margin income
before tax, it's higher margin than the
operating margin. that's currently
running north of 75% on a gap basis.
Incredible margins which might talk a
little bit to the competition and desire
to tap into those pools. Also maybe I
always find this interesting when I
think about the business the number of
employees that they have and how that
translates in terms of profit per head.
So at CME they've got fewer than 4,000
employees. So on a net income after tax
per head that works out to just below a
million dollars a year last year. So I
think it's fair to say that CME is a
very profitable business.
>> Yeah, certainly not bad. When it comes
to converting that into free cash flow,
are there any unique dynamics with
working capital or capex that stop it
from spitting off a lot of cash?
>> No. I mean when we think about capex to
sales that's in the sort of 1 and a
half% range the infrastructure is there
the systems are there so it's quite
extraordinary in terms of the cash that
it just does generate I mean maybe it
helps to put it in context to think
about the capital allocation
historically CME has allocated excess
capital to dividends so they have a
regular dividend and then they do a
special dividend and at the end of each
year although in the last 6 months can
be corrected on this if I'm wrong but
they have introduced the potential for
buybacks I don't think they've used that
yet if they have it will be very recent
so to sort of put that dividend in
perspective and the cash that this
business generates in perspective the
company has returned 29 billion in
dividends since they implemented that
variable dividend policy in early 2012
so 29 billion has gone back in dividends
The market cap at the end of 2011 was 17
billion. Today, CM's market cap is 99
billion. So, it just highlights the
incredible profitability and conversion
into cash flow. Typically, the
conversion ratio is over 100%. Are there
limitations to growth from a capacity
perspective that would require major
investment or could cause things to not
quite keep up with demand in the market?
Is there anything that limits their
ability to grow
>> with capex being low? It's obviously not
on that side, but they do need to
continue to innovate and grow and change
with markets. And if we think back to
when they were just a commodity exchange
doing egg and butter or whatever it
might have been or pork bellies, if they
hadn't innovated and grown with the
markets and the real asset classes, this
business would not be what it is today.
So I don't want to diminish the
importance of innovation but it tends to
be less capital intensive. There has
been some change on the IT side but the
way that's been funded is also quite
interesting and has maintained their
sort of capital light position in some
respects. You mentioned innovation a few
times. Is that really coming in the form
of the new products that they're
offering? Is there anything else in
regards to innovation that you would
highlight as a tangible example of what
that looks like for a customer?
>> Not to overstate it, I'm not sure the
company would say it quite this way, but
the majority of the revenue is coming
from their core products. So think about
it in terms of the framework rather than
the absolute numbers, but that parto
type model where 20% of the products
produce 80% of the revenue. Within
equities, you'll have the S&P 500 link
contracts or the E- Minis and the
micros. That's where a lot of the
trading volume is going, which really
you would expect given everyone's trying
to tap into a pool of liquidity and
efficient markets. R&D is not split out.
So, I think it's safe to assume that's
not a big expense. that product
innovation has been where we've seen
move from standard contracts to
microcontracts say or the introduction
of the crypto class rather than that
revolutionary change which we saw with
the introduction of the financial
futures. It definitely happens, but it's
more the work, I guess, that's going on
behind the scenes to ensure that they're
meeting client demands and people aren't
drifting off to an alternative provider
because they can't get the product they
need on the CME. And the way they tend
to do that is work closely with clients
through sales and research and listening
to customers, hearing customer requests.
CME then take that away and innovate.
But what they're looking for is to make
sure that that product can scale across
time. They don't want a million
contracts and fragmented liquidity and
doing things which only appeal to a very
small subset. Certainly, what impact, if
any, does the move towards passive
investing over active investing have on
the business? Is there a change in
volumes that happens from that whether
higher or lower? It is such a theme in
the market. So I'm just trying to think
of every possible theme and what impact
it might have on CME.
>> It is a positive in terms of those well
for instance the S&P 500 linked contract
and so people as the S&P ETF moves
people are using different instruments
to hedge or try and arbitrage indices
against futures. There's obviously more
use cases as passive tends to grow. So
yeah, definitely a positive for CME on
that side of the business. It's probably
in some respects more tied to the risk
management if you like for the whole
financial ecosystem. I guess there ups
and takes, but yeah, overall positive
for certain parts of the business.
>> The last point on the income statement
and financials and capital allocation
would just be around capital allocation.
You mentioned dividend being a priority,
potentially buybacks, acquisitions and
M&A have been a theme in the sector. How
do you view CME's stance on future M&A?
How much of a theme do you expect that
to be in the market for both CME and the
broader industry?
>> Yeah, the market is obviously quite
consolidated. So if we think about the
corporate actions that CME have been
through, they demutualized in 2000 and
moved from memberowned to a for-profit
company and then they went public 2
years later. They were the first US
exchange to go public. So they beat out
NASDAQ. Its IPO got delayed due to the
dot crash. CME has made two really key
acquisitions since listing. So firstly,
the Chicago Board of Trade. I mean, it
was an incredible acquisition because it
gave CME control over both the short and
long ends of the US interest rate curve.
So prior to that, they had the short
end. The Chicago Board of Trade had the
long end. That enabled the curve to be
put together from a futures perspective
on one platform and created that well,
it's almost a monopoly on US interest
rate futures. And then they also bought
the New York Merkantile Exchange
including comics and that added energy
and metals to CME's portfolio giving it
a foothold in two of the most globally
traded commodity markets. So they're the
key ones that they've made. There was
also the next group acquisition. The
jury is still out I think on that one
focused on treasury market and also on
FX. But put that one to the side. I
don't think you could put that in the
same basket as being such a step forward
for the exchange. Where we are now with
the exchange space since 2000 and the
mutualization, there's been a lot of
consolidation and so opportunities to
really meaningfully move the needle are
quite limited. And what we've seen with
competitors like ICE is they have gone
into more ancillary markets like that
mortgage market. So they have a more
acquisitive approach and always have.
CMA tends to be a little bit more
organically focused. But where the
opportunities have come up, they have
definitely done strategically sensible
acquisitions which have really helped
transform the business. Yeah, it's an
interesting market exchanges as a whole
in terms of the key players seemingly
having won their spaces and time can
change all of that. But but it's
interesting to see how these markets
consolidate over time. I have some
questions on risks, but I would just ask
you first, what would be the main risks
that stand out to you for CME? As I sit
back and think about it today, they've
been a well-run organization. A return
to a lower rate volatility environment
would be a risk to volumes in the short
or midterm. I think ultimately you can
only suppress volatility for so long,
but that would be a risk to their
trading volumes and their revenue. Not
that they haven't handled themselves
well. have been, as I said,
bestin-class, but a significant
operational misstep would always be a
risk. Cyber risk, I don't think that's
unique to CME. Most businesses which
involve software, which is pretty much
every business, is subject to that risk.
And then regulatory change would be the
other one. They'd be the four that would
really stand out. I think acquisition
risk and moving into another area which
is ancillary and not as profitable is
less likely from my discussions with
management and what they've said
publicly and what they've done. They've
had a really good track record. There
was speculation around SIBO as an
acquisition a number of years ago. I
don't think there was much truth to that
but there was an initial market reaction
to that story. I think the reason there
is that within the exchange space to my
mind equity exchanges just aren't as
high quality because they don't have
that vertically integrated clearing. So
what that means is you can actually
settle transactions across different
exchanges and that has led to a lot of
fragmentation in the industry. I think
there's over you know 60 venues that you
can now trade equities on and so that
leads to more competition and we've seen
what's happened in equities in terms of
the cost of trading equities both on the
broking side on the exchange side it has
been a race to the bottom so I don't
think that is a risk but if they were to
go that direction that would present a
different proposition
>> on that point with when it comes to
something like commodities you gave a
good example of the Brent contract Brent
crude versus WTI and they are different
products. I don't know what the
differential is right now in terms of
pricing, but there's all types of things
that factor into that. Is it the case
that CME doesn't even offer a Brent
futures contract and vice versa, or are
they offering it but with just a much
smaller percentage of the market share?
>> Yeah, it's the latter case. When people
are using those contracts, they want to
go to the spot where the liquidity is.
And so you'll see ICE will have similar
products to CME, but they won't really
be trading in any notable volume when
compared. Typically, they tend to stick
to their own areas. And once again, that
comes back to the idea of the core
products producing a lot of revenue. For
something like oil, I think it depends
on what the underlying producer, the
hedger is benchmarking to and then that
will dictate their use of the particular
futures contract. Quite interesting.
Yeah. Just to hear the nuances of those
separate markets. Before we wind down to
the closing question, I wanted to touch
on the regulatory environment and you
mentioned it as a potential risk. I
think you tend to see regulation either
around M&A or if there's a major issue.
It's only after the fact that regulation
gets involved. But I understand the
point on the bank situation being
different. Is there anything as it
regards to leverage or the capital
requirements that are required for
exchanges that could change in future
years? When you talk about regulation,
what would stand out? And you could put
some probability or likelihood around
that to the extent you want to.
Regulation is constantly changing and
it's a hard question. They cover a lot
of ground. What I would say is Terry
Duffy has done an exceptional job
managing that regulatory risk, ensuring
that Congress is well informed, working
both sides of the aisle and keeping CME
in a good place. There's always
something on the radar and it tends to
be they're not existential threats for
CME but things tend to evolve and that
may impact trading volumes in a
particular area but some of those core
areas which we spoke about given the
systemic importance of what CME does I
think it's going to be a very brave act
of Congress to change some of those key
planks for the business but overall it
is changing and it is involving nothing
that I'd call out as being a really big
risk score. I wouldn't attempt a
probability on that. I think overall I
would regard that large change as a
small probability, but that's just my
view. One to keep on the radar, but
nothing beyond that constant monitoring.
This has been a fascinating discussion.
I admit that I have selfishly learned a
lot about exchanges throughout this
conversation. And it's something where
when you step back you say ah you
understand the market mechanism that
they provide but as you get closer
there's a lot of details and a lot of
nuance to it. What stands out to you as
the key lesson or lessons that you could
take away from CME?
>> Thanks man. Well hopefully it hasn't
been boring getting too far into the
weeds. I think key lesson from CME,
there's all the obvious ones in terms of
benefits of a dominant market position
and driven by the network effects and
the natural monopoly. I don't think it's
news to anyone that having a business
where you don't have as much competition
tends to be pretty good for
profitability and shareholder returns.
There's obviously the benefits of scale
and operating leverage as well. Maybe
I'd look at it slightly differently. I
think CME is most unique due to the
value of the optionality within the
business. This is a business that truly
benefits from volatility and that makes
it quite unique. There's not many
businesses like this if I look at the
S&P 500 where they are a direct
beneficiary of that volatility. Now
everything can get taken to extremes. So
if we move to an environment where we
have a horrendous market crash and
people are going bankrupt obviously that
will impact trading in volumes and so
when we get to extreme levels of
volatility that's not good for anyone
but for me that's the key lesson and as
we looked at the business previously we
always thought there was that call
option if you like to a more volatile
environment and so that's the key
takeaway for me. Well, Adam, again,
thank you for this. I do not think it
was too in the weeds. I think it was the
proper amount of detail and nuance for
our listeners. Appreciate you joining us
on Business Breakdowns.
>> Thanks very much for having me, Matt.
Really enjoyed it.
>> To find more episodes of breakdowns
ranging from Costco to Visa to Madna or
to sign up for our weekly summary, check
out join colossus.com. That's
jolsus.com.
[Music]